[Music]
the fastest wind speed ever recorded on
earth
was related to a hurricane gust on april
1996 tropical cyclone olivia was passing
by barrow island western australia
at one moment the storm reached the
speed of a category 4 hurricane
254 miles per hour that's faster than a
formula one racing car
you can probably imagine how much damage
this kind of wind can cause
the only wind storm faster than that is
a tornado
the air inside a whirlwind can move at a
speed of 300 miles per hour
unfortunately there's no sure way to
measure tornadic winds
weather instruments never survive the
experience oh and
licking your finger and sticking it up
in the wind to measure speed
also isn't a good idea here unless you
don't mind losing your arm or worse
here are some more numbers 35 miles per
hour and more
that's the speed of the average blizzard
50 to 60 miles per hour
that's how fast a severe thunderstorm
moves more than 74 miles per hour is the
speed of a powerful tropical hurricane
up to 400 miles per hour wait do such
speeds exist
yep but you need to travel to jupiter to
see a storm that speedy
the great red spot is an enormous storm
raging
in the southern hemisphere of the gas
giant its top parts are towering more
than
five miles above the surrounding cloud
tops the storm's almost three times as
wide as our planet
in 2017 nasa's juno space probe
managed to collect lots of data about
the red spot
and it turned out that the monster of a
storm went more than 200 miles
down into the planet's atmosphere that's
30 to 100 times deeper than any ocean on
earth
but since these measurements were most
likely imprecise
the storm's true roots can be reaching
even deeper
the great red spot is colder than the
rest of the atmosphere
and jupiter's temperatures are minus 234
degrees fahrenheit in its
upper cloud layers the closer it is to
the core the hotter it gets
but the highest temperatures ever
recorded on the planet were in the
atmosphere right above the great red
spot
there the heat can reach 2400 degrees
fahrenheit
that's hotter than lava on our planet
the storm's extreme conditions and
turbulence produce gravitational and
sound waves
these waves might be responsible for the
superheating
the storm itself is also warmer at its
bottom than at the top
if you found yourself at its center you
wouldn't be too impressed
but on the edges the wind speed reaches
300 to 420 miles per hour
that's faster than earth's tornadoes now
this will help you picture the immense
force of such winds
on earth the wind doesn't have to be
faster than 60 miles per hour
to lift a person as heavy as 170 pounds
from the ground
a wind as fast as 75 miles per hour can
uproot large trees
peel off roofs break windows and turn
over mobile homes
when wind speed reaches 150 it can send
cars fly now picture the having a storm
as powerful as the great red spot can
cause on our planet
but could such an enormous anticyclone
occur on earth
luckily not our planet doesn't have the
unique conditions
needed for the storm to form
scientists faced lots of challenges when
they were trying to understand the
mystery that was the great red spot
and it was mostly the fault of the
storm's home planet
it's more than a thousand times larger
than earth and over 300 times as massive
jupiter is a gas giant which means it
consists mostly of
fill in the blank around the planet's
core
there's an ocean of liquid hydrogen and
the atmosphere is also mostly made up of
hydrogen and helium
that means jupiter doesn't have any
solid ground the only thing that could
make the storm weaken
without any friction the storm has
already been churning for centuries
the hot gases in the planet's atmosphere
are always moving
rising falling and swirling just like on
our planet when cooler and hotter gases
mix and merge into one another
they form giant circling storms
astronomers think that once
several enormous storms came together
and created the great red spot
and now it keeps raging by constantly
drawing cool gases from below
and hot gases from above plus this
monster of a storm absorbs other smaller
vortices
they make the great red spot even more
powerful
unfortunately thick clouds on jupiter
don't allow people to see
what's going on in the planet's lower
atmosphere astronomers have been
speculating on what may lie beneath the
great red spot for decades
could it be a massive volcano not likely
jupiter is mostly gas that's why it
doesn't have a crust that could crack
and release scorching hot stuff from the
planet's interior
several theories try to explain why the
storm has its trademark color
it varies from whitish and pale salmon
to orange and brick red
some scientists believe the answer lies
below the great red spot
closer to the planet's surface a
colorless layer
of ammonium hydrosulfide might be
reacting with cosmic rays
or the uv radiation coming from the sun
this somehow gives the spot its pretty
red color
but so far it's just a theory
astronomers have been observing the
great red spot since the 1830s
and for the first time the storm was
spotted in 1665
and described as the permanent spot in
other words
the storm is almost 400 years old
strangely it's been shrinking in size
since the beginning of the 21st century
in 2019 it began flaking at the edges
with smaller pieces breaking off and
vanishing
if this process continues by 2040 the
great red spot
will become circular or it may disappear
altogether the storm isn't only getting
smaller
it's also growing taller and getting a
more intense orange here
it's not completely clear why it's
happening
might be because of a chemical reaction
it occurs when some new material
rises to the top layers of the
atmosphere from below
the great red spot might be the most
famous storm in the solar system
but it's by no means the only one
even on jupiter there's a bit less known
little red spot
one more anti-cyclone but smaller in
size
well when i say smaller i mean the
things not as large as its big sister
but it's still about the size of earth
recently the highest wind speed inside
the little red spot
has increased up to 400 miles per hour
a storm as wide as our planet rages on
saturn
it's called the great white spot the
storm has a tale of white clouds
encircling the entire planet
it occurs every 30 years or so when
saturn's northern hemisphere tilts
toward the sun
this storm indeed starts as a spot but
then it stretches in length
astronomers have figured out that the
great white spot is actually a huge
system of thunderstorms
at the peak of the storm lightning can
flash more than 10
times per second but the main mystery
about the great white
it's where it gets its energy from some
scientists think
it may be powered by the sun others
argue that the storm's cloud pattern
only makes sense
if there is an internal heat source that
can power the winds
great dark spots on neptune are massive
storms that form in areas with high
atmospheric pressure
that's different on earth here storms
appear when the pressure is low
around the spot's edges the wind speeds
can reach 1300 miles per hour
astronomers have observed six dark spots
on neptune so far
these powerful storms get borne deep in
the planet's atmosphere
and the darker a storm is the brighter
the methane clouds around it are
another monster-sized storm raging on
saturn
looks pretty much like a hurricane or
typhoon on our planet
it has an eye and spiraling clouds
surrounding it
but compared to earth hurricanes the one
on the ring planet is
titanic on saturn the eye of the storm
is up to 1250 miles across
the bright clouds closer to the edges of
the hurricane
are moving at a speed of 330 miles per
hour
but one of the most unusual things about
this storm
is its shape it has six sides and is
known as
the hexagon when astronomers
saw the first images with the vortex
they did a double take
the thing was just too similar to our
storms and still
the one whirling on saturn has an eye
that's almost 20 times larger than
any people have seen on earth the storm
also moves four times faster than
hurricane winds on our planet
saturn's atmosphere has little water
vapor how the bizarre hexagon storm is
getting by in such conditions
is a mystery plus unlike the constantly
drifting hurricanes on earth
the one on saturn seems to have nowhere
to go
for some inexplicable reason it's stuck
at the planet's north pole